{'title': 'ZERO-SHOT BUILDING AGE CLASSIFICATION FROM FACADE IMAGE USING GPT-4',
 'authors': [{'name': 'Z. Zeng',
   'affiliation': 'Department of Civil, Environmental and Geomatic Engineering, University College London, UK'},
  {'name': 'J. M. Goo',
   'affiliation': 'Department of Civil, Environmental and Geomatic Engineering, University College London, UK'},
  {'name': 'X. Wang',
   'affiliation': 'Department of Civil, Environmental and Geomatic Engineering, University College London, UK'},
  {'name': 'B. Chi',
   'affiliation': 'Department of Geography, University College London, UK'},
  {'name': 'M. Wang',
   'affiliation': 'Department of Civil, Environmental and Geomatic Engineering, University College London, UK'},
  {'name': 'J. Boehm',
   'affiliation': 'Department of Civil, Environmental and Geomatic Engineering, University College London, UK'}],
 'abstract': "A building's age of construction is crucial for supporting many geospatial applications. Much current research focuses on estimating building age from facade images using deep learning. However, building an accurate deep learning model requires a considerable amount of labelled training data, and the trained models often have geographical constraints. Recently, large pre-trained vision language models (VLMs) such as GPT-4 Vision, which demonstrate significant generalisation capabilities, have emerged as potential training-free tools for dealing with specific vision tasks, but their applicability and reliability for building information remain unexplored. In this study, a zero-shot building age classifier for facade images is developed using prompts that include logical instructions. Taking London as a test case, we introduce a new dataset, FI-London, comprising facade images and building age epochs. Although the training-free classifier achieved a modest accuracy of 39.69%, the mean absolute error of 0.85 decades indicates that the model can predict building age epochs successfully albeit with a small bias.",
 'key_findings': "The training-free classifier achieved a modest accuracy of 39.69% with a mean absolute error of 0.85 decades, indicating it can predict building age epochs successfully albeit with a small bias. In the classification of architectural styles and building age epochs, methods have evolved from using pixelwise classifiers and object detectors to deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) and Vision Transformers (ViTs). Recent studies have shown that ViTs, such as the Swin transformer, can effectively improve classification accuracy in predicting the age of buildings from street view imagery. Additionally, the integration of Geographic Information System (GIS) data has been explored for enhancing age prediction. The emergence of pre-trained Large Language Models (LLMs) and Vision Language Models (VLMs) has further expanded capabilities in various tasks, including geographic knowledge and reasoning, with zero-shot learning showing promise in fields beyond natural language processing. Large VLMs like GPT-4 emerge as new contenders to classify or predicate structural attributes without any training data. The user's prompt has major influence in LLM-based tasks. Precision and Recall are used to evaluate the model's performance on individual age epoch, while Micro F1-score is used as a composite metric to evaluate the overall performance on the whole multi-categorisation task. The task of building age estimation is challenging due to the high degree of similarity in architectural styles between consecutive age epochs and the classification into relatively short time intervals. The Mean Absolute Error (MAE) of the age epochs is introduced as another performance metric to quantify the difference between the mid-year of the predicted and actual age epochs. For the 131 building facade images in the FI-London dataset, GPT-4 Vision produced predictions with a total accuracy/micro F1 of 39.69/0.85. The model showed varying degrees of precision, recall, and F1 scores across different age epochs, with the highest precision observed in the 1940-1959 epoch (100%) and the highest recall in the 1960-1979 epoch (75%). The mean absolute error (MAE) varied significantly across epochs, with the lowest MAE observed in the 1980-1999 epoch (0.0 years). Among the 79 negative cases analyzed, one was identified as a 'hallucination', where GPT-4 generated content outside the given categories but was more accurate. GPT-4 Vision's performance varied significantly across different age epochs, with no correct predictions for epochs <1700, 1840-1859, and >2020, indicating very low performance. However, it showed high performance for epochs 1920-1939 and 2000-2019, with precision, recall, and F1 scores over 50%. Most facade images built in these age epochs are classified accurately with F1 scores over 50%. However, all other epochs are not well classified with low F1 scores (20%-50%). Specifically, the age epoch 1940-1959 has a high precision (100%) but a relatively low recall (21.43%), indicating accurate but not comprehensive prediction capabilities in this age epoch. GPT-4 Vision demonstrates varying levels of precision and recall across different age epochs when classifying building facade images, with certain epochs showing high recall but low precision, indicating a capability to cover most buildings of a specific age but also misclassify many. The Mean Absolute Error (MAE) analysis reveals a generally small bias in predictions, with most age epochs classified into adjacent ones, reflecting the similarity in architectural styles. However, the age epoch 1700-1749 presents a high MAE, suggesting difficulty in prediction due to renovations or rebuilds. The introduction of a special confusion matrix, considering misclassification within one or two neighbouring epochs as correct, significantly improves prediction accuracy for nearly all categories except for the earliest epoch (<1700). The confusion matrices show the model's performance in classifying stylistically close age epochs. The standard blue matrix represents the model's baseline performance. The orange matrix, with adjustment for one adjacent age epoch, and the green matrix, with adjustment for two adjacent age epochs, show improved classification accuracy by considering stylistic similarities between adjacent epochs. In this study, a training-free classifier based on GPT-4 Vision has been developed to estimate building age epochs from facade images. The classifier achieved a Mean Absolute Error (MAE) of only 0.85 decade in predicting the age epochs of buildings, with 52 correct predictions out of 131 tested images. Most of the age epochs can be predicted successfully but only approximately, indicating they are predicted to be in adjacent but not far off age epochs. However, accurate predictions better than 2 decades and predictions for very old buildings are still challenging.",
 'limitation_of_sota': 'Building an accurate deep learning model for estimating building age from facade images requires a considerable amount of labelled training data, and the trained models often have geographical constraints. Traditional models often struggle when applied to different geographic locations due to the specificity of their training data. This limitation hinders the adaptability and scalability of such models across diverse geographic areas. Most datasets for architectural vision tasks such as building age epoch classification have restricted geographic locations and small sample size. The existing deep learning classifiers may not accurately predict building age epochs due to reliance on training data and the need for optimized instruction cues.',
 'proposed_solution': "A zero-shot building age classifier for facade images developed using GPT-4 Vision with prompts that include logical instructions, which does not require any training. We explore the idea of applying a foundation model without additional training in the context of estimating the age of a building from a single image of its facade. The article discusses the use of Vision Transformers (ViTs) and the combination of deep CNNs with GIS data for improving the accuracy of building age classification. It also highlights the potential of pre-trained Large Language Models (LLMs) and Vision Language Models (VLMs) in performing tasks across various fields, including geospatial science, without the need for labeled training data. These models' ability to understand both images and language, and their training on large and diverse datasets, allow for better adaptability and application in different geographic locations. This study explores the zero-shot ability of GPT-4 as a classical method for classifying or predicating structural attributes without any training data. The study proposes a method for zero-sample classification using GPT-4 Vision for predicting the age epoch of buildings in London. It involves crafting command prompts that include a general task description, the encoded input image, a list of building age epochs to constrain the output, and instructions for formatting the results. The method also requires the output of the reasoning process behind the predictions. The proposed GPT-4-based classifier does not require any training and the inference process is conducted through the API provided by OpenAI, which does not require significant computational resources. The study suggests that GPT-4 Vision can rely on its wider knowledge to make accurate judgments, indicating a different insight from traditional deep learning classifiers. However, it also highlights the need for further optimization of instruction cues to improve prediction accuracy. The proposed solution involves adjusting the classification model to account for stylistic similarities between consecutive age epochs. This adjustment is quantified in two scenarios: one adjacent age epoch and two adjacent age epochs. These adjustments aim to improve the model's accuracy in distinguishing between stylistically close epochs. The study proposed a training-free classifier based on GPT-4 Vision for estimating building age epochs from facade images without the need for training data. An enhanced dataset named FI-London, combining new facade images with stored building attributes, was introduced to implement this solution.",
 'paper_limitations': "The classifier struggles to predict the age of very old buildings and is challenged by fine-grained predictions within 2 decades. GPT-4 Vision is still unable to directly output JSON-formatted results at the time of the experiments. There is a high degree of similarity in architectural styles between consecutive age epochs, making the task challenging, especially for buildings at the intersection of two epochs. The paper does not explicitly discuss the limitations of the proposed solution. The study's limitations include GPT-4 Vision's over-reliance on training data information and the challenge of accurately classifying buildings from less represented or architecturally ambiguous epochs. While GPT-4 Vision accurately captures and distinguishes between buildings from widely separated age epochs, it struggles with consecutive epochs that are stylistically similar. Additionally, the model faces challenges in accurately predicting buildings from the earliest age epoch (<1700), even with adjusted confusion matrices. The paper does not specify the limitations of the proposed solution, nor does it provide details on the dataset, the exact improvement metrics, or the potential impact of these adjustments on epochs that are not stylistically close. The construction age is difficult to predict particularly for old buildings, possibly because these older buildings have been renovated, which causes the models to be easily confused. Accurate predictions better than 2 decades and predictions for very old buildings are still challenging."}